gnus-desktop-notify.el: Gnus Desktop Notification global minor mode
===================================================================

.. contents::

Desktop notification integration in `Gnus <http://www.gnus.org/>`_!? `Ohh
goody!`


Basic setup
-----------

``gnus-desktop-notify.el`` provides a simple mechanism to notify the user when
new messages are received. For basic usage, to be used in conjunction with
``gnus-daemon``, put the following:

.. code:: scm

  (require 'gnus-desktop-notify)
  (gnus-desktop-notify-mode)
  (gnus-demon-add-scanmail)

into your ``.gnus`` file. The default is to use alert_ if available, which
works on every operating system and allows the user to customize the
notification through emacs. See https://github.com/jwiegley/alert#for-users for
further info. If not available, the ``notifications`` library (part of emacs >=
24) is used, so no external dependencies are required. With emacs <= 23 instead
the generic ``notify-send`` program is used, which (in Debian or Ubuntu) is
available in the ``libnotify-bin`` package.

You can also call any program directly by changing the
``gnus-desktop-notify-exec-program`` variable, or change the behavior entirely
by setting a different ``gnus-desktop-notify-function`` function.

The group names are collapsed by default, and a single notification is
generated containing all the groups with a count of new messages.


Mac setup
---------

If alert_ is available, growl_ notifications are generated by default. No setup
is required! See the ``alert`` customization group to tweak the generated
messages to your liking.

You can also download and install growl_ manually, and then customize as
follows:

.. code:: scm

  (require 'gnus-desktop-notify)
  (setq gnus-desktop-notify-function 'gnus-desktop-notify-exec
	gnus-desktop-notify-exec-program "growlnotify -a Emacs.app -m")
  (gnus-desktop-notify-mode)
  (gnus-demon-add-scanmail)


Advanced setup
--------------

By default, all groups are notified when new messages are received. You can
exclude a single group by setting the ``group-notify`` group parameter to
"t" (this is quite common for spammy groups).

You can also selectively monitor groups instead by changing the
``gnus-desktop-notify-groups`` variable to ``'gnus-desktop-notify-explicit``
and then manually selecting which groups to include the same way.

Press "``G c``" in the group buffer to customize group parameters
interactively.

See the ``gnus-desktop-notify`` customization group for more details.


.. _alert: https://github.com/jwiegley/alert
.. _growl: http://growl.info/
