=== find

Executes a query against all locations or a directory.

.Usage
----------------------------------------------------------------------
<usage_find>
----------------------------------------------------------------------

.Example
----------------------------------------------------------------------
chee find created:201410*
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Find searches by default all locations. If `--file` is given, it
searches this directory instead. Note that using `--file` takes
longer, since the directory must be traversed. Without `-f` an index
is used and searching this is much faster. If you use `--file` you can
also specify `--recursive` to recursively traverse the directory and
`--indexed true|false` to find files that are indexed or not. You can
also specify a single file to `--file`, then a query and a
`--recursive` flag are simply ignored.

The option `--all` has two meanings, depending on whether `--file` is
specified or not: Normally with `--file`, the directory is scanned for
image and video files and all other are skipped. This is done by using
a default query and with `--all` this default query is ignored. The
default query can also be changed in the configuration file; see the
xref:_configuration[configuration] chapter for details.

If `--file` is not specified, the index is searched and
non-existing files are not in the result. Then `--all` will ignore
this and non-existing files show up in the result.

With `--first` the result can be limited to the first `n` files.

The output can be controlled with a format pattern, specified by the
`--pattern` option. Please see the chapter on
xref:_format_patterns[Format Patterns] on how to use this. If no
pattern is specified, a default pattern is used which lists certain
properties of the files, one file per line. The value for `--pattern`
can be a reference to a pattern in the configuration file or a pattern
definition. There are three predefined patterns: `oneline` (the
default), `detail` and `lisp`. If the pattern is not one of these, it
is tried to find in the configuration file and then it is used as a
pattern itself.

The `query` is used to search a directory or the index. If multiple
conditions are given, they are wrapped in a `(& â€¦)`. Please see the
page abount xref:_query[queries] for details.

Other commands that operate on a set of files usually share these
options.
