* inline-crypt.el
/Simple inline AES encryption via openssl/

This package may be useful if youâ€™d just like to encrypt parts of
files or buffers, and to have encrypted output in the same line as
other unencrypted text.

** Installation

I've only tested this in Emacs 24, on a *Nix system. You will also
need to have the openssl command-line utility installed.

If openssl isn't in your PATH, customize the
`inline-crypt-openssl-command' variable to point to it.

** Use
There are four main interactive commands that encrypt and decrypt
text. Each of these commands will prompt you for the encryption
password. Encrypted data is produced and consumed in base64, not
binary.

`inline-crypt-encrypt-region' encrypts the current region, and
displays the encrypted output in a temporary buffer. Or, with a prefix
argument (`C-u'), the region will be replaced with the encrypted
output.

`inline-crypt-decrypt-region' decrypts the current region, and
displays the decrypted output in a temporary buffer. Or, with a prefix
argument (`C-u'), the region will be replaced with the decrypted
output.

`inline-crypt-encrypt-string' prompts the user for a string to
encode, and displays the encrypted output in a temporary buffer. Or,
with a prefix argument (`C-u'), the encrypted output will be inserted
into the current buffer at the point.

`inline-crypt-decrypt-string' prompts the user for a string to
encode, and displays the decrypted output in a temporary buffer. Or,
with a prefix argument (`C-u'), the decrypted output will be inserted
into the current buffer at the point.

** Example
Select the following encrypted text, and type `C-u M-x
inline-crypt-decrypt-region'.

The password is `foo': U2FsdGVkX1+dYdbNSIt8vtU2EBP6ZaoEhL9uOHTKH88=

** Why?

For a long time, I used KeepassX to store my mountains of passwords,
so I don't have to click the Link of Shame ("I forgot my password")
every time I spend too much time away from a site. KeepassX is great,
except it uses a binary database. I keep all my stuff under source
control, so plain text is a lot more convenient. (Automatic merging?
Line-by-line diffs? Delicious.)

So, instead of KeepassX, I now store all my passwords in an org file,
and use this code to only encrypt the sensitive bits.

I don't mean to suggest that this code is complete, elegant, or even
"good enough" for you. But, it does exactly what I need. Maybe it'll
be useful for someone else, too!

And, before you ask, I used openssl instead of aes.el "because
reasons".
